---
title: "TAMIDS Data Science Competition 2018"
date: 2018-04-20
tags: [Data Analytics]
header:
  image: "/images/tamids/taxiheader.jpg"
excerpt: "1st place entry in the 2018 Texas A&M Data Science Competition.
The project focuses on the public Chicago taxi ridership dataset from 2013 through
2017."
toc: true
toc_label: Table of Contents
---

Chicago today is a city of about 2.7 million people filled with tourist locations, business skyscrapers, and nightlife hotspots. The combination of high density destinations and strong tourist industry create a huge market for taxis, and Chicago’s taxi drivers have historically had a higher salary than those in most other cities, with a median of about $36,000 a year, with a few hotspots being moneymakers for these drivers. In recent years, however, the rideshare industry has changed the landscape of the transit markets in Chicago.  

Two competing ridesharing companies, Uber and Lyft, have seen rapid growth in recent years across the United States. While it’s possible that a portion of their business comes from growth in the ridesharing/taxi market itself, the rise of these ridesharing companies (and other smaller companies) has resulted in the decline of the taxi industry in many areas. Chicago’s taxi industry
in particular has taken a hit, as Uber and Lyft grew in the city with no major restrictions being placed on the ridesharing companies until the summer of 2016. The data used in this competition contains four years of training data and a segment of 2017’s data, which allow us to both explore Chicago’s taxi industry as a whole and fit predictive models on variables of interest. We are interested in what changes individual taxi drivers in Chicago experience, and forecasting future changes to these taxi drivers is of huge interest to the city of Chicago, especially as they consider adding harsher legislation to counter ridesharing companies. Forecasting the median daily fares will give us an idea of both how much business a typical taxi driver will see in a day as well as how much they will earn. In doing so, we aim to predict the future prospects of a typical Chicago taxi driver.
